# MARTA
An analysis of a large city subway ridership
It's 2017, and the planning department of a a transit authority wants to better forecast surge demand for subway cars-
Turnstile entries and exits were collected for the period April-Oct 2017 for Lindbergh, Arts Center, North Ave, Peachtree, Civic Center stations. The purpose of this study was to visually examine demand spikes for special events. Here we are looking for outliers; high ridership due to nonrecurring demand. (ie. events not forecasted.) Most though not all should occur on weekends. Average rider volume, turnstile exits, are tracked for each month. Month over month, rider volume shows a diurnal pattern as expected - with peaks at around 7:00 AM and another at 5:00 PM. Lindbergh Station, because it serves as the main input pipe for all riders heading downtown from the north seuburbs, was used as a surrogate for demand volume throughout the system.
Here, we drill into July 2017 daily volume to see unusual weekend volume. We do see an unusual volume on the weekend of July 29. The analyst has some detective work to do. A search of Atlanta events downtown during the week of July 29 finds ComicCon, a motorcycle show occuring. More importantly, a UFC Atlanta soccer game is going on that weekend. Graphing it, we see that extra demand nearly doubles, from about 400/hr to 750/hr. (Marta uses a 24hr time clock, with hour 0 being 1 am).
The peak occurs at 15:00, or 3 pm. Marta should schedule more frequent arrivals, or add cars to the train, to anticipate this demand. In fact, they do this. A UFC match schedule shows another home game on July 4, 2017 - a Tuesday. We will examine this for outlier demand as well. There is a spike on July 4th, driven by the Holiday revelry and the UFC match. It peaks at 11 AM, roughly 50% increase at 1400 riders/hr. The diurnal 7 am - 5 pm demand is depressed due to the work holiday. MARTA would want to decrease commuter train frequency here, and hook up extra cars midday. Using Five Points Station entry data, let's see if we can better predict volume heading toward the Mercedes Benz soccer stadium on July 4: We do not have data for the Blue line exiting at the stadium, visual inspection of the entry data at Five Points, the transfer point, shows that rider volume is actually lower that equivalent Tuesdays in July. We will investigate further when GWCC/CNN blue line exits are available.
